---
layout: post
title: "on breaks"
author: "Dhruti Pandya"
categories: journal
tags: [documentation, sample]
#image: mountains.jpg
---

Breaks have always had a negative connotation: breaking a bone, breaking up, breaking down. So why is there so much excitement regarding a break, when it comes to taking a break from school/work/whatever else takes up a majority of our lives?

For many, a break is the time to pursue interests we don’t normally have the time for. I cannot count the number of friends that have become master bakers, artists, and gym enthusiasts during just a one-month winter break from university. I’m not immune to this urge to explore my interests as soon as I’m on break, but it does make me wonder—why aren’t these things that we do normally, if we want to do them so bad? Why do we need a break from our everyday life to make time for these things?

For weeks prior to any school holidays, all I hear around me are conversations about how people can’t wait for the break. But why wait? Why not take a break right then? It isn’t hard to take a few hours for ourselves, whether it be exploring a new place or going on a hike or talking to a friend about anything but work. Taking a break doesn’t need to wait. In fact, it **shouldn’t** wait. Taking regular breaks improves productivity, creativity, and overall well-being while managing stress. All of which highlight the importance of breaks as a regular practice, not something we put off until we reach a ‘breaking point.’

The same idea applies when it comes to achieving goals. While there is value in the ‘work while you work, play while you play’ mentality, I believe leaving our ‘play’ for the little breaks we get in between months of non-stop work is incredibly harmful, not only for our mental health, but also in terms of creating a sustainable life. When I’m in the middle of a busy midterm season, I yearn for some time away from my work. But in the middle of a month-long winter break without much to do, I can’t wait to get back to school and to be out and about, doing things. It’s the balance that lies in the sweet in-between, the balance between work and play as two colors in a marble cake, each independent of one another, but intertwined so deeply the cake would not exist, let alone look as beautiful, without both together—that is the balance I’m striving towards. That is the balance I believe will lead me to a happier life.

In fact, I don’t like the word ‘break’ in the first place. Because ‘break’ implies destruction, damage, and reaching a breaking point. But why wait until that breaking point, instead of taking action to make our everyday life sustainable? A life where fulfilling activities—whether it be new hobbies we want to explore, habits we want to imbibe in our lives, or little things that make us happy—are intertwined with the things we *have* to do, balancing each other out.

Life is too short to wait for a break to start creating a sustainable life. Breaks don’t have to be ‘all-or-nothing’. It is easy to feel like we can only pursue our interests in a big way, like taking a long vacation or a sabbatical. Unfortunately, this isn’t realistic, and can often lead to giving up on these interests altogether. The key is to make it a conscious, everyday decision to seek that balance between work and play.

**After all, if we need a break to do the things that make us feel alive, haven't we missed something crucial in the mystery of life?**
